.TH PHS 5 "May 2026" "Phasor 4.0.0" "Phasor File Formats"
.SH NAME
phs \- Phasor source code format
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B .phs
file format contains Phasor programming language source code.
Phasor is a scripting language with a C-like syntax, supporting static type annotations, functions, variables, control structures, and structured types.
.PP
Source files are plain text using UTF-8 encoding and can be executed by
.BR phasor (1)
or compiled to bytecode by
.BR phasorcompiler (1).
.SH LANGUAGE OVERVIEW
Phasor features:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Mandatory type annotations for variables, structure fields, and parameters, with an \fBany\fR type to opt out of static tracking
.IP \(bu 2
A register-based compiler emitting type-specialized execution paths (e.g., integer versus floating-point instructions)
.IP \(bu 2
First-class functions supporting Uniform Function Call Syntax (UFCS) method rewriting
.IP \(bu 2
C-like control structures and block scoping
.IP \(bu 2
Compile-time element-wise type validation on statically annotated arrays
.IP \(bu 2
Preprocessed relative file inclusion
.RE
.SH SYNTAX
.SS Shebang
If the first two characters of a source file are
.BR #! ,
the lexer will ignore the entire first line. This allows Unix-like systems to execute Phasor scripts directly:
.PP
.nf
.RS
#!/usr/bin/env phasor
.RE
.fi
.SS Comments
Phasor supports single-line comments:
.PP
.nf
.RS
// This is a comment
.RE
.fi
.SS Variables and Type Annotations
Variables are declared with the
.B var
keyword. They require an explicit type constraint, though the \fBany\fR type can be used to bypass compile-time tracking:
.PP
.nf
.RS
var x: int = 42;               // Explicit integer constraint
var dyn: any = "Dynamic";      // Opt-out of static type tracking
var y: float = 3.14;           // Explicit float constraint
var name: string = "Alice";    // Explicit string constraint
var flag: bool = true;         // Explicit boolean constraint
var empty: int;                // Defaults to null (uninitialized)
.RE
.fi
.PP
A variable declaration must contain a type annotation. The initializer expression is optional. If no initializer is provided, the variable defaults to \fBnull\fR.
.SS Data Types
Phasor supports the following basic types:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B null
\- Represents a null or uninitialized value.
.IP \(bu 2
.B any
\- Opts out of compile-time type tracking, allowing dynamic type assignment.
.IP \(bu 2
.B bool
\- Boolean values
.B true
and
.B false .
.IP \(bu 2
.B int
(or
.B i64 )
\- 64-bit signed integers.
.IP \(bu 2
.B float
(or
.B f64 )
\- 64-bit double-precision floating point numbers.
.IP \(bu 2
.B string
\- UTF-8 encoded text strings.
.IP \(bu 2
.B array
\- Dynamically or statically typed collections of elements.
.IP \(bu 2
.B struct
\- Custom user-defined structures.
.IP \(bu 2
.B void
\- Used primarily for function return types indicating no return value.
.RE
.SS Strings
Phasor supports two types of string literals:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B Standard Strings ("...")
\- Must be defined on a single line. Supports standard escape sequences (\\a, \\b, \\f, \\n, \\r, \\t, \\v, \\\\, \\', \\", \\e, \\E), octal escapes (e.g., \\033), hexadecimal escapes (\\xNN), and Unicode escapes (\\uNNNN, \\UNNNNNNNN). Standard escape sequences like \\e and \\E resolve to ASCII ESC (\\x1b).
.IP \(bu 2
.B Raw Strings (`...`)
\- Enclosed in backticks. These can span multiple lines and do not process escape sequences.
.RE
.SS Structs
Custom structured types are declared using the
.B struct
keyword, requiring named fields and explicit type annotations:
.PP
.nf
.RS
struct Point {
    x: int,
    y: int
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
Structs are instantiated using named field values:
.PP
.nf
.RS
var p: Point = Point{ x: 10, y: 20 };
.RE
.fi
.PP
Anonymous struct literals are also supported using curly braces without a type name:
.PP
.nf
.RS
var anon: any = { x: 10, y: 20 };
.RE
.fi
.PP
Fields can be accessed or mutated via dot notation:
.PP
.nf
.RS
p.x = 42;
var current_x: int = p.x;
.RE
.fi
.SS Arrays
Array literals are constructed using square brackets. Because type annotations are mandatory, arrays must be explicitly typed:
.PP
.nf
.RS
var list: int[] = [1, 2, 3];
.RE
.fi
.PP
Arrays can be explicitly typed with fixed dimensions (e.g.,
.B int[10]
) or dynamic dimensions (e.g.,
.B int[]
). If a statically typed array variable is assigned or modified, the compiler validates at compile-time that the array literal elements or assigned values match the declared element type.
.PP
Elements are accessed and assigned using standard bracket syntax:
.PP
.nf
.RS
var item: int = list[0];
list[1] = 99;
.RE
.fi
.SS Functions and UFCS Method Calls
Functions are declared with the
.B fn
keyword. Parameters must explicitly specify types, while the return type is optional:
.PP
.nf
.RS
fn add(x: int, y: int) -> int {
    return x + y;
}

fn greet(name: string) {
    print "Hello, " + name + "!";
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
Functions without a return type or return expression implicitly evaluate to
.B null .
.PP
.B Uniform Function Call Syntax (UFCS)
is supported. Calling a function on an object using dot notation (e.g.
.B obj.method(arg)
) is automatically rewritten by the parser into a global function call with the object passed as the first parameter (e.g.
.B method(obj, arg)
).
.SS Print Statements
Expressions can be evaluated and printed to standard output using the
.B print
keyword:
.PP
.nf
.RS
print "Hello, World!";
.RE
.fi
.SS Includes
Phasor supports source organization via dumb C-style file inclusion:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B Include (include "path";)
\- Replaces the statement with the textual parsed AST of the specified file, resolved relative to the containing directory of the source file.
.RE
.SH CONTROL FLOW
.SS If Statements
.PP
.nf
.RS
if (condition) {
    // code
} else if (other) {
    // code
} else {
    // code
}
.RE
.fi
.SS While Loops
.PP
.nf
.RS
while (condition) {
    // code
}
.RE
.fi
.SS For Loops
.PP
.nf
.RS
for (var i: int = 0; i < 10; i++) {
    // code
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
Both
.B break
and
.B continue
statements are supported within loop bodies.
.SS Switch Statements
The switch statement evaluates a control expression and jumps to matching case blocks. The comparison uses value equality:
.PP
.nf
.RS
switch (value) {
    case 1:
        // code
        break;
    case 2:
        // code
        break;
    default:
        // code
}
.RE
.fi
.SS Operators
.SS Arithmetic
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
+, -, *, /, % (modulo)
.RE
.SS Comparison
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
==, !=, <, >, <=, >=
.RE
.SS Logical
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
&& (and), || (or) (both feature short-circuit evaluation)
.RE
.SS Assignment
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
= (basic assignment; right-associative)
.RE
.SS Unary
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
- (negate), ! (not)
.RE
.SS Postfix
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
++ (increment), -- (decrement) (limited to variables; compiled using type-specialized add/subtract instructions)
.RE
.SS Access
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
. (member access), [ ] (indexing), -> (return type arrow)
.RE
.SH COMPILER OPTIMIZATIONS AND BUILT-INS
The code generator provides built-in optimizations and compile-time evaluations for key standard library functions:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B len(s)
\- Returns string length. If the argument is a standard literal string, it is constant-folded at compile-time.
.IP \(bu 2
.B substr(s, i, length)
\- Extracts a substring. If the length is evaluated as literal
.B 1
, the compiler automatically rewrites the call to a faster single-character retrieval instruction.
.IP \(bu 2
.B char_at(s, i)
\- Emits a direct index character lookup instruction.
.IP \(bu 2
.B starts_with(s, prefix) / ends_with(s, suffix)
\- Verifies if a string starts or ends with the specified substring. Constant-folded if both arguments are string literals.
.RE
.SH COMPILATION AND CODE GENERATION
The Phasor compiler translates the parsed Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) into bytecode instructions utilizing a dynamic register allocator:
.RS
.IP 1.
.B Constant Folding
\- The compiler folds binary operations, logical operations, and optimized standard library calls when operands are literal values.
.IP 2.
.B Type Specialized Instructions
\- Through variable type tracking and literal evaluation, the compiler optimizes binary operations. If both operands are known to be integers, integer-specific registers instructions (e.g.
.BR IADD_R ,
.BR ISUB_R )
are selected. Otherwise, the compiler falls back to double-precision floating-point instructions (e.g.
.BR FLADD_R ,
.BR FLSUB_R ). Similarly, postfix operators utilize specialized integer or float increments.
.IP 3.
.B Array Type Checking
\- Compile-time type validations are executed on array literals and array element assignments to guarantee conformity to their statically declared base types.
.RE
.SH SOURCE FILE CHARACTERISTICS
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Supports international characters in strings and comments
.IP \(bu 2
Identifiers are limited to ASCII alphanumerics and underscores
.IP \(bu 2
String literals support UTF-8 characters
.RE
.SH LINE ENDINGS
Phasor accepts standard line endings:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
LF (\\n) Unix/Linux/macOS
.IP \(bu 2
CRLF (\\r\\n) Windows
.RE
.SH STYLE CONVENTIONS
While not enforced, the following conventions are recommended:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Use 4 spaces for indentation, no tabs
.IP \(bu 2
Opening braces on the same line
.IP \(bu 2
Function names in camelCase
.IP \(bu 2
Constants in UPPER_CASE
.IP \(bu 2
Variables in camelCase
.IP \(bu 2
One statement per line
.IP \(bu 2
Blank line between function definitions
.RE
.SH COMPILATION STAGES
Source files are processed through several stages:
.RS
.IP 1.
.B Lexical Analysis
\- Source text tokenized by
.BR Lexer
.IP 2.
.B Parsing
\- Tokens converted to an Abstract Syntax Tree AST (preprocessor inclusions resolved textually)
.IP 3.
.B Code Generation
\- AST compiled to register-allocated bytecode instructions with specialized instruction paths
.IP 4.
.B Serialization
\- Bytecode saved to .phsb or .phir format
.RE
.SH LIMITATIONS
Current language limitations:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
No operator overloading
.IP \(bu 2
No macros or metaprogramming
.IP \(bu 2
No garbage collection
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR phasor (1),
.BR phasorcompiler (1),
.BR phasorvm (1),
.BR phasornative (1),
.BR phasorstd_array (3),
.BR phasorstd_string (3),
.BR phasorstd_type (3),
.BR PHSB (5),
.BR PHS (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire