.TH PHSB 5 "June 2026" "Phasor 4.0.0" "Phasor File Formats"
.SH NAME
phsb \- Phasor Binary bytecode format
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B .phsb
file format is a compact binary representation of compiled Phasor bytecode. It is the standard compiled format for Phasor programs, designed for efficient loading and execution by the Phasor virtual machine.
.PP
PHSB files contain serialized bytecode instructions, constant values, variable mappings, block scope allocations, function entry points, function type signatures, struct definitions, and integrity checksums, all stored in a platform-independent binary format.
.SH FILE STRUCTURE
A PHSB file consists of a header followed by multiple data sections. All multi-byte integers are stored in little-endian byte order.
.PP
.B File Header (16 bytes)
.RS
.TP
.B Offset 0-3: Magic Number
4-byte magic number: 0x50485342 (ASCII: "PHSB")
.TP
.B Offset 4-7: Version
4-byte version number: 0x03000000 (version 3.0.0.0)
.TP
.B Offset 8-11: Flags
4-byte flags field (reserved for future use, currently 0)
.TP
.B Offset 12-15: Checksum
4-byte CRC32 checksum of all data following the 16-byte header
.RE
.PP
.B Data Sections
.RS
Following the header are seven sections, each with a section identifier byte. The sections are processed in the following order:
.IP \(bu 2
.B 0x01
- Constants section
.IP \(bu 2
.B 0x02
- Variables section
.IP \(bu 2
.B 0x07
- Scope variables section
.IP \(bu 2
.B 0x04
- Functions section
.IP \(bu 2
.B 0x06
- Function types section
.IP \(bu 2
.B 0x05
- Structs section
.IP \(bu 2
.B 0x03
- Instructions section
.RE
.SH CONSTANTS SECTION
The constants section stores all literal values used in the program.
.PP
.B Format:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Section ID: 0x01 (1 byte)
.IP \(bu 2
Count: Number of constants (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each constant:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Type tag (1 byte):
.RS
.IP \- 2
.B 0x00
- Null
.IP \- 2
.B 0x01
- Boolean (followed by 1 byte: 0=false, 1=true)
.IP \- 2
.B 0x02
- Integer (followed by 8 bytes, int64, little-endian)
.IP \- 2
.B 0x03
- Float (followed by 8 bytes, IEEE 754 double, little-endian)
.IP \- 2
.B 0x04
- String (followed by 2-byte length, then UTF-8 bytes)
.IP \- 2
.B 0x05
- Struct (followed by name string, 4-byte uint32 field count, and then sequential [string field_name, value field_value] pairs)
.IP \- 2
.B 0x06
- Array (followed by 4-byte uint32 element count, and then sequential elements recursively formatted as values)
.RE
.RE
.RE
.SH VARIABLES SECTION
The variables section maps variable names to their runtime indices.
.PP
.B Format:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Section ID: 0x02 (1 byte)
.IP \(bu 2
Count: Number of variables (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
Next index: Next available variable index (4 bytes, int32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each variable:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Name: String (2-byte length + UTF-8 bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
Index: Variable index (4 bytes, int32)
.RE
.RE
.SH SCOPE VARIABLES SECTION
The scope variables section outlines the variables allocated inside individual lexical scope blocks to clear them on exit.
.PP
.B Format:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Section ID: 0x07 (1 byte)
.IP \(bu 2
Count: Number of scope block entries (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each scope block:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Var count: Number of variables in this scope (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each variable:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Index: Variable compilation index (4 bytes, int32)
.RE
.RE
.RE
.SH FUNCTIONS SECTION
The functions section maps function names to their instruction index addresses.
.PP
.B Format:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Section ID: 0x04 (1 byte)
.IP \(bu 2
Count: Number of functions (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each function:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Name: String (2-byte length + UTF-8 bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
Address: Instruction index (4 bytes, int32)
.RE
.RE
.SH FUNCTION TYPES SECTION
The function types section stores return type and parameter type signature metadata.
.PP
.B Format:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Section ID: 0x06 (1 byte)
.IP \(bu 2
Count: Number of type-annotated functions (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each function:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Name: String (2-byte length + UTF-8 bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
Return Type Name: String (2-byte length + UTF-8 bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
Param Count: Number of parameters (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each parameter:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Param Type Name: String (2-byte length + UTF-8 bytes)
.RE
.RE
.RE
.SH STRUCTS SECTION
The structs section stores structural layouts for user-defined types.
.PP
.B Format:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Section ID: 0x05 (1 byte)
.IP \(bu 2
Count: Number of structs (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each struct:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Name: String (2-byte length + UTF-8 bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
First constant index: Index in constant pool of the first default field value (4 bytes, int32)
.IP \(bu 2
Field count: Number of fields (4 bytes, int32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each field:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Name: String (2-byte length + UTF-8 bytes)
.RE
.RE
.RE
.SH INSTRUCTIONS SECTION
The instructions section contains the actual program logic. Each instruction is a fixed 13-byte record, supporting up to three 32-bit operands.
.PP
.B Format:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Section ID: 0x03 (1 byte)
.IP \(bu 2
Count: Number of instructions (4 bytes, uint32)
.IP \(bu 2
For each instruction (13 bytes):
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Opcode: Operation code (1 byte, uint8)
.IP \(bu 2
Operand 1: First operand (4 bytes, int32)
.IP \(bu 2
Operand 2: Second operand (4 bytes, int32)
.IP \(bu 2
Operand 3: Third operand (4 bytes, int32)
.RE
.RE
.SH INTEGRITY VERIFICATION
The PHSB format includes integrity checking through CRC32 checksums:
.RS
.IP 1. 3
The checksum in the header covers all bytes following the 16-byte header.
.IP 2. 3
The checksum uses the standard CRC32 algorithm with polynomial 0xEDB88320.
.IP 3. 3
On loading, the runtime recalculates the checksum of the data sections and compares it.
.IP 4. 3
Mismatched checksums indicate file corruption or tampering.
.RE
.SH BYTE ORDER
All multi-byte values in PHSB files use little-endian byte order, ensuring platform independence across modern architectures. Big-endian systems must perform byte swapping during deserialization.
.SH PLATFORM INDEPENDENCE
PHSB files are platform-independent:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
No platform-specific data structures are stored.
.IP \(bu 2
Consistent byte ordering (little-endian) is enforced.
.IP \(bu 2
No direct pointer or raw memory address space details are serialized.
.IP \(bu 2
Fixed-size data types are used with explicit widths.
.IP \(bu 2
UTF-8 encoding is used for all text data.
.RE
.PP
A PHSB file compiled on one platform can be executed on any other platform with a compatible Phasor virtual machine.
.SH VERSION COMPATIBILITY
The version number in the header (currently 3.0.0.0) determines compatibility:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
The VM checks the version before loading.
.IP \(bu 2
Incompatible versions are rejected with an error.
.RE
.SH SIZE LIMITS
The PHSB format has the following limits:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum constants: 4,294,967,295 (uint32 max)
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum variables: 4,294,967,295 (uint32 max)
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum functions: 4,294,967,295 (uint32 max)
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum instructions: 4,294,967,295 (uint32 max)
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum structs: 4,294,967,295 (uint32 max)
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum string length: 65,535 bytes (uint16 max)
.RE
.SH USAGE
PHSB files are:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Generated by
.BR phasorcompiler (1)
from Phasor source files.
.IP \(bu 2
Executed by
.BR phasorvm (1)
for optimal performance.
.IP \(bu 2
Used as the standard distribution format for compiled Phasor applications.
.RE
.SH ADVANTAGES
The binary format provides:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B Compact size
- Significantly smaller than text-based formats.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Fast loading
- No parsing required, direct deserialization.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Integrity checking
- CRC32 checksums detect corruption.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Platform independence
- Runs on any system with a compatible Phasor VM.
.RE
.SH COMPARISON WITH PHIR
.TS
center;
cb cb
l l.
Feature	PHSB vs PHIR
_
Human-readable	No vs Yes
File size	Smaller vs Larger
Loading speed	Faster vs Slower
Editability	No vs Yes
Integrity check	Yes vs No
Comments	No vs Yes
Platform binary	No vs No
.TE
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
While PHSB files include integrity checking, they should be treated with caution:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
CRC32 is not cryptographically secure.
.IP \(bu 2
Checksums detect corruption, not malicious modification.
.IP \(bu 2
Only execute PHSB files from trusted sources.
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR phasor (1),
.BR phasorcompiler (1),
.BR phasorvm (1),
.BR PHIR (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
.br
Licensed under the Apache License with LLVM Exceptions, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt