.TH PHASOR\-LSP 1 "March 2026" "Phasor 3.1.0" "Phasor Manual"
.SH NAME
phasor\-lsp \- Phasor Language Server Protocol server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B phasor\-lsp
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B phasor\-lsp
is a Language Server Protocol (LSP) server for the Phasor programming language. It communicates with LSP-compatible editors and IDEs over standard input and output using the JSON-RPC 2.0 protocol, providing intelligent code features such as diagnostics, hover information, and go-to-definition support.
.PP
The server lexes and parses Phasor source files on document open and change events, reports syntax errors as diagnostics, and builds an in-memory symbol table for each open document to support code intelligence features.
.PP
.B phasor\-lsp
is not intended to be invoked directly by end users. It should be launched automatically by an LSP-aware editor or IDE via the appropriate language server configuration.
.SH PROTOCOL
The server implements a subset of the Language Server Protocol using the JSON-RPC 2.0 message format. Messages are framed with an HTTP-style
.B Content-Length
header:
.PP
.nf
.RS
Content-Length: <N>\\r\\n
\\r\\n
<N bytes of JSON>
.RE
.fi
.PP
On Windows, stdin and stdout are switched to binary mode to prevent CR/LF translation from corrupting the framing.
.SH CAPABILITIES
The server advertises the following capabilities during initialization:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B textDocumentSync
(incremental) \(em the server is notified of document open, change, and close events
.IP \(bu 2
.B hoverProvider
\(em hover information for symbols, functions, and structs
.IP \(bu 2
.B definitionProvider
\(em go-to-definition for globally declared symbols
.RE
.SH SUPPORTED METHODS
.TP
.B initialize
Handshake with the client. Returns server capabilities and version information. Server name is
.I phasor-lsp
version
.IR 0.1.0 .
.TP
.B initialized
Notification acknowledging successful initialization. No action is taken.
.TP
.B shutdown
Gracefully stops the server after sending a response to the client.
.TP
.B exit
Terminates the server process immediately.
.TP
.B textDocument/didOpen
Parses the document and publishes diagnostics for any lexer or parser errors found.
.TP
.B textDocument/didChange
Re-parses the document with the new full text content and republishes diagnostics.
.TP
.B textDocument/didClose
Removes the document from memory and clears its diagnostics.
.TP
.B textDocument/hover
Returns a markdown-formatted hover tooltip for the symbol or declaration under the cursor.
Hover content is wrapped in a Phasor fenced code block. Returns
.I null
if no symbol is found at the given position.
.TP
.B textDocument/definition
Returns the source location of the declaration for the symbol under the cursor. Returns
.I null
if the symbol cannot be resolved.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Syntax errors produced by the Phasor lexer or parser are reported to the client via
.B textDocument/publishDiagnostics
notifications immediately after each open or change event. Diagnostics carry severity level 1 (Error) and include start and end source positions.
.SH HOVER INFORMATION
Hover responses are generated from the AST node at the cursor position. The server produces human-readable signatures for:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B Functions
\(em includes parameter names, types, pointer and array qualifiers, and return type
.IP \(bu 2
.B Structs
\(em lists field names and their types
.IP \(bu 2
.B Variables
\(em shows the variable name with a
.I var
prefix
.RE
.SH GO-TO-DEFINITION
Definition lookup resolves cursor positions to globally declared symbols (functions, structs, and variables). The returned location points to the declaration site in the same document. Cross-file definition lookup is not currently supported.
.SH SYMBOL TABLE
On each successful parse, the server builds a global symbol table for the document covering all top-level declarations and exported symbols. The table is used to back hover and definition requests.
.SH EXAMPLES
Configure
.B phasor\-lsp
as a language server in Neovim using nvim-lspconfig:
.PP
.nf
.RS
require('lspconfig').phasor_lsp.setup({
  cmd = { 'phasor-lsp' },
  filetypes = { 'phasor' },
  root_dir = require('lspconfig.util').find_git_ancestor,
})
.RE
.fi
.PP
Configure in VS Code via a custom extension manifest:
.PP
.nf
.RS
"languageServer": {
  "command": "phasor-lsp",
  "filetypes": ["phasor"]
}
.RE
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Clean shutdown after receiving a
.B shutdown
or
.B exit
request, or when stdin reaches EOF
.SH NOTES
The server processes only full document content changes (whole-document sync). Incremental delta changes are not supported; clients should send the complete updated document text on each change event.
.PP
JSON-RPC parse errors result in an error response with code \-32700. Requests for unimplemented methods receive an error response with code \-32601.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR LSP (3),
.BR phasor (1),
.BR phasorjit (1),
.BR phasorcompiler (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
