.TH PHASORCOMPILER 1 "January 2026" "Phasor 2.2.0" "Phasor Manual"
.SH NAME
phasorcompiler \- Phasor source code compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B phasorcompiler
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I file.phs
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B phasorcompiler
compiles Phasor source files (.phs) into bytecode (.phsb) or intermediate representation (.phir) format. The bytecode can be executed by the Phasor VM, while IR files can be used for analysis.
.PP
The compiler performs lexical analysis, parsing, and code generation to transform high-level Phasor source code into executable bytecode or a human-readable intermediate representation.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIFILE\fR
Specify the output file path. If not provided, the output file will have the same base name as the input file with the appropriate extension (.phsb for bytecode, .phir for IR).
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-ir
Compile to intermediate representation (IR) format instead of bytecode. The output file will have a .phir extension.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output during compilation. Shows detailed information about the compilation process.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help information and exit.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.phs
Phasor source files \fBPHS(5)\fR
.TP
.I *.phsb
Phasor bytecode files (compiled output) \fBPHSB(5)\fR
.TP
.I *.phir
Phasor intermediate representation files \fBPHIR(5)\fR
.SH EXAMPLES
Compile a source file to bytecode:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorcompiler program.phs
.RE
.fi
.PP
Compile with a specific output file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorcompiler program.phs -o output.phsb
.RE
.fi
.PP
Compile to IR format:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorcompiler --ir program.phs -o program.phir
.RE
.fi
.PP
Compile with verbose output:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorcompiler -v program.phs
.RE
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful compilation
.TP
.B 1
Compilation error or invalid arguments
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Compilation errors are reported to standard error with detailed information about syntax errors, semantic errors, or invalid input files.
.SH NOTES
The compiler will refuse to compile bytecode (.phsb) files or IR (.phir) files, as these are already compiled formats.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR PHS (5),
.BR PHSB (5),
.BR PHIR (5),
.BR Compiler (3),
.BR phasorrepl (1),
.BR phasorvm (1),
.BR phasorjit (1),
.BR phasornative (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
