.TH phasorasm 1 "March 2026" "Phasor 3.1.0" "Phasor Manual"
.SH NAME
phasorasm \- Phasor intermediate representation assembler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B phasorasm
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I input.phir
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B phasorasm
reads a Phasor intermediate representation file (.phir) and assembles it into a compiled Phasor bytecode file (.phsb) suitable for execution by
.BR phasorvm (1)
or
.BR phasor (1).
.PP
This tool is the counterpart to
.BR phasordisassembler (1),
which performs the reverse operation. Together they allow inspection, hand-editing, and round-tripping of compiled Phasor binaries through a human-readable intermediate form.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIFILE\fR
Specify the output file path. If not provided, the output file is placed alongside the input file with the same base name and a
.I .phsb
extension.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-nologo
Suppress the banner and copyright information.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-silent
Suppress all output except errors. Implies
.BR \-\-nologo .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help information and exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I input.phir
The Phasor intermediate representation file to assemble. Only one input file may be specified.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.phir
Phasor intermediate representation files \fBPHIR(5)\fR
.TP
.I *.phsb
Phasor compiled bytecode output files \fBPHSB(5)\fR
.SH EXAMPLES
Assemble an IR file to bytecode (output written to program.phsb):
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorasm program.phir
.RE
.fi
.PP
Assemble with an explicit output path:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorasm program.phir -o release/program.phsb
.RE
.fi
.PP
Assemble silently (no stdout, errors only):
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorasm -s program.phir -o program.phsb
.RE
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful assembly
.TP
.B 1
Assembly failed due to an invalid or unreadable input file, a write error, or invalid arguments
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
On success,
.B phasorasm
prints the output file path to standard output unless
.BR \-\-silent
is specified. Errors are always written to standard error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR PHIR (5),
.BR PHSB (5),
.BR phasordecomp (1),
.BR phasorcompiler (1),
.BR phasorvm (1),
.BR phasor (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
