.TH PHASORVM 1 "January 2026" "Phasor 2.1.0" "Phasor Manual"
.SH NAME
phasorvm \- Phasor virtual machine for executing compiled bytecode
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B phasorvm
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I file.phsb
[\fISCRIPT_ARGS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B phasorvm
is the Phasor virtual machine that executes pre-compiled Phasor bytecode files. Unlike the JIT runtime, it does not perform lexing, parsing, or code generation, making it significantly faster for production deployments.
.PP
The VM loads serialized bytecode directly and begins execution immediately. This makes it the preferred choice for performance-critical applications and production environments where compilation overhead is undesirable.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output. Displays debugging information including bytecode statistics and execution details.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help information and exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I file.phsb
Required Phasor bytecode file to execute. Must be a valid compiled bytecode file created by phasorcompiler.
.TP
.I SCRIPT_ARGS
Arguments passed to the bytecode program. These are accessible within the program through the standard library's argument handling functions.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.phsb
Phasor bytecode files (compiled by phasorcompiler)
.SH VERBOSE OUTPUT
When verbose mode is enabled, the following information is displayed:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Bytecode loading status and file path
.IP \(bu 2
Number of instructions in the bytecode
.IP \(bu 2
Number of constants defined
.IP \(bu 2
Number of variables allocated
.IP \(bu 2
Execution start and completion notifications
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
Execute a compiled bytecode file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorvm program.phsb
.RE
.fi
.PP
Execute with script arguments:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorvm program.phsb arg1 arg2 arg3
.RE
.fi
.PP
Execute with verbose output:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasorvm --verbose program.phsb
.RE
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error, invalid bytecode, or file not found
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Error messages are printed to standard error on Unix-like systems. On Windows, critical errors are displayed in a message box dialog for better visibility.
.PP
In verbose mode, detailed debugging information is printed to standard error throughout the execution process.
.SH LIMITATIONS
The current implementation does not support import statements in the VM runtime. Programs that require multiple modules should be linked together during compilation or use the JIT runtime.
.SH PERFORMANCE
The VM provides the fastest execution for Phasor programs because it:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Skips lexical analysis and parsing
.IP \(bu 2
Avoids code generation overhead
.IP \(bu 2
Loads optimized bytecode directly
.IP \(bu 2
Starts execution immediately
.RE
.PP
For production deployments, compile with phasorcompiler and execute with phasorvm for optimal performance.
.SH NOTES
Bytecode files are platform-independent and can be executed on any system with a compatible Phasor VM installation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR PHSB (5),
.BR BinaryRuntime (3),
.BR phasorcompiler (1),
.BR phasorjit (1),
.BR phasorrepl (1),
.BR phasornative (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
