.TH PHASOR 1 "March 2026" "Phasor 3.1.0" "Phasor Manual"
.SH NAME
phasor \- unified Phasor language runtime and entry point
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B phasor
.I file.phs
[\fISCRIPT_ARGS\fR...]
.br
.B phasor
.I file.phsb
[\fISCRIPT_ARGS\fR...]
.br
.B phasor
.br
.I <text>
.B |
.B phasor
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B phasor
is the primary unified entry point for the Phasor programming language. It automatically selects the appropriate runtime based on input: executing Phasor source files with the scripting runtime, running pre-compiled bytecode with the binary runtime, or launching the interactive REPL when invoked without arguments.
.PP
When standard input is not a terminal (i.e., input is piped), the runtime reads all content from stdin and executes it as a Phasor script.
.SH EXECUTION MODES
.TP
.B A. Pipe mode
If stdin is not a terminal, all content is read from standard input and executed as a Phasor script via the scripting runtime.
.TP
.B B. JIT / Bytecode mode
If a file argument is provided,
.B phasor
dispatches based on the file extension:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.I .phs
\(em Executes source through the scripting runtime (lexing, parsing, code generation, and VM execution in one step)
.IP \(bu 2
.I .phsb
\(em Loads and executes pre-compiled bytecode via the binary runtime
.IP \(bu 2
.I .phir
\(em Phasor IR execution is not yet implemented
.RE
.TP
.B C. REPL mode
If invoked without arguments and stdin is a terminal,
.B phasor
launches the interactive Read-Eval-Print Loop. See
.BR phasorrepl (1)
for details on the REPL environment.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help ", " \-? ", " /help ", " /h
Display usage information and exit. These flags are recognised when no valid file path is given as the first argument.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I file.phs
A Phasor source file to execute with the scripting runtime.
.TP
.I file.phsb
A pre-compiled Phasor bytecode file to execute with the binary runtime.
.TP
.I SCRIPT_ARGS
Additional arguments forwarded to the running script or bytecode program. Accessible within the program through the standard library's argument handling functions (argc, argv).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.phs
Phasor source files \fBPHS(5)\fR
.TP
.I *.phsb
Phasor compiled bytecode files \fBPHSB(5)\fR
.TP
.I *.phir
Phasor intermediate representation files \fBPHIR(5)\fR
.SH EXAMPLES
Execute a Phasor source file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasor hello.phs
.RE
.fi
.PP
Execute a pre-compiled bytecode file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasor hello.phsb
.RE
.fi
.PP
Pass arguments to a script:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasor script.phs arg1 arg2
.RE
.fi
.PP
Execute a script from a pipe (Unix):
.PP
.nf
.RS
echo "print(\"Hello!\\n\");" | phasor
.RE
.fi
.PP
Execute a script from a pipe (Windows CMD):
.PP
.nf
.RS
echo print("Hello!"); | phasor
.RE
.fi
.PP
Launch the interactive REPL:
.PP
.nf
.RS
phasor
.RE
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error, parse error, unknown file extension, or file not found
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are printed to standard error. When a file argument is supplied but the path does not exist,
.B phasor
reports whether the argument was interpreted as an unknown option or a missing file.
.SH NOTES
.B phasor
does not perform ahead-of-time compilation. To compile a source file to bytecode for repeated execution, use
.BR phasorcompiler (1)
and
.BR phasorvm (1).
For native executable generation, see
.BR phasornative (1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR PHS (5),
.BR PHSB (5),
.BR ScriptingRuntime (3),
.BR BinaryRuntime (3),
.BR Repl (3),
.BR phasorcompiler (1),
.BR phasorvm (1),
.BR phasorjit (1),
.BR phasorrepl (1),
.BR phasornative (1),
.BR phasor\-lsp (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
