.TH PULSAR 1 "March 2026" "Phasor 3.1.0" "Phasor Manual"
.SH NAME
pulsar \- Pulsar scripting language runtime and REPL
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pulsar
.I file
[\fISCRIPT_ARGS\fR...]
.br
.B pulsar
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pulsar
is the runtime for the Pulsar scripting language. It executes Pulsar scripts when a file argument is provided, or launches an interactive Read-Eval-Print Loop (REPL) when invoked without arguments.
.PP
Pulsar is a scripting language in the Phasor language family. Its runtime shares tooling infrastructure with the broader Phasor ecosystem but is maintained as a distinct language and interpreter.
.SH EXECUTION MODES
.TP
.B Script mode
When one or more arguments are provided, the first argument is treated as the path to a Pulsar script file. The interpreter loads and executes the file, forwarding all arguments (including argv[0]) to the running script.
.TP
.B REPL mode
When invoked without arguments,
.B pulsar
starts an interactive REPL session via the Pulsar frontend. Users can enter and evaluate expressions and statements interactively. The REPL maintains state across inputs and provides immediate feedback.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I file
Path to a Pulsar script file to execute.
.TP
.I SCRIPT_ARGS
Additional arguments passed to the script. Accessible within the script through the interpreter's standard argument handling.
.SH EXAMPLES
Execute a Pulsar script:
.PP
.nf
.RS
pulsar hello.pulsar
.RE
.fi
.PP
Execute a script with arguments:
.PP
.nf
.RS
pulsar script.pulsar arg1 arg2
.RE
.fi
.PP
Launch the interactive REPL:
.PP
.nf
.RS
pulsar
.RE
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution or clean REPL exit
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error or unhandled exception
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are printed to standard error. Unhandled C++ exceptions produce a message of the form:
.PP
.nf
.RS
Error: <message>
.RE
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR phasor (1),
.BR phasorrepl (1),
.BR phasorjit (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
