.TH PHASOR-ISA 7 "June 2026" "Phasor 4.0.0" "Phasor Instruction Set 2.0"
.SH NAME
phasor-isa \- overview of the Phasor virtual machine instruction set architecture
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Phasor Instruction Set is a hybrid architecture supporting both stack-based (v1.0) and register-based (v2.0) execution models.
The virtual machine maintains:
.IP \(bu 2
A primary data stack for temporary values.
.IP \(bu 2
A call stack for function return addresses.
.IP \(bu 2
256 virtual registers (r0 through r255).
.IP \(bu 2
A global variable table.
.SH STACK-BASED INSTRUCTIONS
These instructions manipulate the top of the data stack.
For binary operations, the VM pops the second operand (b), then the first (a), and pushes the result.
.SS Data Movement
.TP
\fBPUSH_CONST\fR \fIindex\fR
Pushes the constant at pool index onto the stack.
.TP
\fBPOP\fR
Removes the top value from the stack.
.TP
\fBTRUE_P\fR, \fBFALSE_P\fR, \fBNULL_VAL\fR
Pushes literal true, false, or null.
.TP
\fBSTORE_VAR\fR \fIindex\fR
Pops top of stack and stores in variable slot.
.TP
\fBLOAD_VAR\fR \fIindex\fR
Pushes variable value onto stack.
.SS Arithmetic
.TP
\fBIADD\fR, \fBISUBTRACT\fR, \fBIMULTIPLY\fR, \fBIDIVIDE\fR, \fBIMODULO\fR
Integer operations.
.TP
\fBFLADD\fR, \fBFLSUBTRACT\fR, \fBFLMULTIPLY\fR, \fBFLDIVIDE\fR, \fBFLMODULO\fR
Float operations.
.TP
\fBSQRT\fR, \fBPOW\fR, \fBLOG\fR, \fBEXP\fR, \fBSIN\fR, \fBCOS\fR, \fBTAN\fR
Math functions.
.TP
\fBNEGATE\fR
Unary negation.
.SS Comparison and Logic
.TP
\fBIEQUAL\fR, \fBINOT_EQUAL\fR, \fBILESS_THAN\fR, \fBIGREATER_THAN\fR, \fBILESS_EQUAL\fR, \fBIGREATER_EQUAL\fR
Integer comparisons.
.TP
\fBFLEQUAL\fR, \fBFLNOT_EQUAL\fR, \fBFLLESS_THAN\fR, \fBFLGREATER_THAN\fR, \fBFLLESS_EQUAL\fR, \fBFLGREATER_EQUAL\fR
Float comparisons.
.TP
\fBIAND\fR, \fBIOR\fR, \fBFLAND\fR, \fBFLOR\fR, \fBNOT\fR
Logical operations.
.SS String Operations
.TP
\fBLEN\fR
Pops string or array, pushes its length.
.TP
\fBCHAR_AT\fR
Pops index, pops string, pushes character at index.
.TP
\fBSUBSTR\fR
Pops length, start index, and string, pushes substring.
.SH REGISTER-BASED INSTRUCTIONS (v2.0)
Register instructions operate on r0-r255.
These are used for 3-address code optimizations.
.SS Register Data Movement
.TP
\fBMOV\fR \fIrA\fR, \fIrB\fR
Copy value from register rB to rA.
.TP
\fBLOAD_CONST_R\fR \fIrA\fR, \fIindex\fR
Load constant pool index into register rA.
.TP
\fBLOAD_VAR_R\fR \fIrA\fR, \fIindex\fR
Load global variable at index into rA.
.TP
\fBSTORE_VAR_R\fR \fIrA\fR, \fIindex\fR
Store value from rA into variable table at index.
.TP
\fBPUSH_R\fR \fIrA\fR, \fBPUSH2_R\fR \fIrA\fR, \fIrB\fR
Push one or two registers to the stack.
.TP
\fBPOP_R\fR \fIrA\fR, \fBPOP2_R\fR \fIrA\fR, \fIrB\fR
Pop stack to one or two registers.
.SS 3-Address Arithmetic
Format: OP rA, rB, rC (result rA = rB op rC).
.TP
\fBIADD_R\fR, \fBISUB_R\fR, \fBIMUL_R\fR, \fBIDIV_R\fR, \fBIMOD_R\fR
Integer math.
.TP
\fBFLADD_R\fR, \fBFLSUB_R\fR, \fBFLMUL_R\fR, \fBFLDIV_R\fR, \fBFLMOD_R\fR
Float math.
.TP
\fBSQRT_R\fR, \fBPOW_R\fR, \fBLOG_R\fR, \fBEXP_R\fR, \fBSIN_R\fR, \fBCOS_R\fR, \fBTAN_R\fR
Math functions in registers.
.SS Register Comparison and Logic
.TP
\fBIEQ_R\fR, \fBINE_R\fR, \fBILT_R\fR, \fBIGT_R\fR, \fBILE_R\fR, \fBIGE_R\fR
Integer comparisons.
.TP
\fBFLEQ_R\fR, \fBFLNE_R\fR, \fBFLLT_R\fR, \fBFLGT_R\fR, \fBFLLE_R\fR, \fBFLGE_R\fR
Float comparisons.
.TP
\fBIAND_R\fR, \fBIOR_R\fR, \fBFLAND_R\fR, \fBFLOR_R\fR
Logical operations.
.TP
\fBNEG_R\fR, \fBNOT_R\fR
Unary negation and logical NOT.
.SH CONTROL FLOW
.TP
\fBJUMP\fR \fIaddress\fR
Unconditional jump to instruction at address.
.TP
\fBJUMP_IF_FALSE\fR \fIaddress\fR
Pops value; jumps if value is false or null.
.TP
\fBJUMP_IF_TRUE\fR \fIaddress\fR
Pops value; jumps if value is true.
.TP
\fBJUMP_BACK\fR \fIaddress\fR
Jump backwards (used for loops).
.TP
\fBCALL\fR \fIindex\fR
Pushes return address and jumps to user function defined at constant index.
.TP
\fBCALL_NATIVE\fR \fIindex\fR
Calls a native C/C++ function.
.TP
\fBRETURN\fR
Pops return address from call stack and resumes.
.TP
\fBIMPORT\fR \fIindex\fR
Imports a module using the constant path.
.TP
\fBEXIT_SCOPE\fR \fIindex\fR
Cleans up variables upon exiting a local scope.
.SH OBJECTS AND STRUCTS
.TP
\fBNEW_STRUCT\fR \fIindex\fR
Creates an instance of the struct definition at constant index.
.TP
\fBGET_FIELD\fR, \fBSET_FIELD\fR
Dynamic field access using stack.
.TP
\fBNEW_STRUCT_INSTANCE_STATIC\fR \fIindex\fR
Optimized struct creation using metadata.
.TP
\fBGET_FIELD_STATIC\fR, \fBSET_FIELD_STATIC\fR
Optimized access using constant index and pre-calculated offsets.
.SH SYSTEM AND I/O
.SS Stack I/O
.TP
\fBPRINT\fR
Pops value and prints to stdout.
.TP
\fBPRINTERROR\fR
Pops value and prints to stderr.
.TP
\fBREADLINE\fR
Reads a line from stdin and pushes the string result.
.TP
\fBSYSTEM\fR
Pops command and executes via host shell.
.TP
\fBSYSTEM_OUT\fR, \fBSYSTEM_ERR\fR
Executes shell command and pushes stdout or stderr.
.TP
\fBHALT\fR
Terminates the virtual machine execution.
.SS Register I/O
.TP
\fBPRINT_R\fR, \fBPRINTERROR_R\fR
Print register to stdout or stderr.
.TP
\fBREADLINE_R\fR
Read a line from input into a register.
.TP
\fBSYSTEM_R\fR, \fBSYSTEM_OUT_R\fR, \fBSYSTEM_ERR_R\fR
Execute system commands utilizing registers for arguments and return outputs.
.SH SEE ALSO
phasor(3), phir(5)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2026 Daniel McGuire