.TH PULSAR 7 "February 2026" "Phasor 0.3.158" "Pulsar Scripting Language"
.SH NAME
pulsar \- minimal scripting language for the Phasor runtime

.SH DESCRIPTION
Pulsar is a scripting language implemented as part of the Phasor Programming Language Toolchain. It is designed based on Phasor Alpha and runs during Phasor Runtime for meta-programming.

.SH DATA TYPES
Pulsar supports three primary data types:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBInteger\fR: Signed whole numbers (e.g., \fB42\fR, \fB-7\fR).
.IP \(bu 2
\fBString\fR: Text literals enclosed in double quotes (e.g., \fB"hello"\fR). Escape sequences such as \fB\\"\fR are supported within string literals.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBBoolean\fR: Logical values \fBtrue\fR and \fBfalse\fR.

.SH VARIABLES
Variables are declared using the \fBlet\fR keyword.
.TP
.B let \fIname\fR = \fIvalue\fR
Assigns a value to a variable identifier. Identifiers must start with a letter or underscore and contain only alphanumeric characters or underscores. Variables are strictly typed based on their initial assignment.

.SH FUNCTIONS
Functions are declared using the \fBfunc\fR keyword and support typed parameters and return values.
.SS Definition Syntax
\fBfunc\fR \fIname\fR [\fIreturn_type\fR] \fIparam_type\fR:\fIparam_name\fR ... { \fIbody\fR }
.IP \(bu 2
\fIname\fR: The function identifier.
.IP \(bu 2
\fIreturn_type\fR: Optional return type (\fBint\fR, \fBstring\fR, or \fBbool\fR); defaults to \fBint\fR if not specified.
.IP \(bu 2
\fIParameters\fR: Parameters follow the \fBtype:name\fR syntax (e.g., \fBint:x\fR).
.TP
.B return \fIvalue\fR
Exits the function and returns the specified value.

.SH CONTROL FLOW
.SS Conditionals
.TP
.B if \fIcondition\fR { \fIstatements\fR } [else { \fIstatements\fR }]
Executes a block of code if the \fIcondition\fR evaluates to \fBtrue\fR. 
.IP \(bu 2
\fBComparison\fR: Supports \fB==\fR, \fB!=\fR, \fB<\fR, \fB>\fR, \fB<=\fR, and \fB>=\fR.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBLogic\fR: Supports logical AND (\fB&&\fR), OR (\fB||\fR), and NOT (\fB!\fR).
.IP \(bu 2
\fBTruthiness\fR: Integers are \fBtrue\fR if non-zero; strings are \fBtrue\fR if not empty and not equal to \fB"0"\fR or \fB"false"\fR.

.SS Loops
.TP
.B while \fIcondition\fR { \fIstatements\fR }
Repeatedly executes the block as long as the \fIcondition\fR remains \fBtrue\fR.

.SH SYSTEM AND I/O
.TP
.B print \fIarg\fR...
Prints values to standard output without a newline.
.TP
.B println \fIarg\fR...
Prints values to standard output followed by a newline.
.TP
.B help [\fIcommand\fR]
Displays help information for the language or a specific command.
.TP
.B version
Displays the version information of the toolchain.
.TP
.B exit
Terminates the Pulsar interpreter session.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR phasor (3),
.BR phasor-isa (7)

.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
