.TH PHASORRT 3 "April 2026" "phasorrt" "Phasor Runtime Library 3.3.0"
.SH NAME
phasorrt \- C API for the Phasor Runtime Virtual Machine
.SH SYNOPSIS
The
.B PHASOR C API
is a universal API for interacting with the Phasor runtime, designed to be universal across compilers, languages, and releases of Phasor.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Phasor Runtime provides a lightweight virtual machine for executing
Phasor (PHS) and Pulsar (PUL) scripts. This C API is designed to be ABI-stable
and compiler-independent. An opaque
.B void *
state pointer hides the internal VM object, allowing safe usage across different
compilers and runtime versions.
.PP
All execution functions can accept a
.B NULL
state pointer; if one is not provided, a temporary state is created internally
and destroyed when the call returns. This is convenient for one-shot script
evaluation but less efficient for repeated use. For repeated execution or when
calling functions that require a persistent state (e.g.,
.BR initStdLib() ,
.BR resetState() ),
the caller should manage the lifecycle explicitly with
.B createState()
and
.BR freeState() .
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS State Management
.TP
.BR createState ()
Allocate and return a new VM state. The state is an opaque pointer; its
internal structure is not part of the public ABI.
.RS
.PP
.B Returns:
.B void *
pointer to the new state, or
.B NULL
on failure.
.RE
.TP
.BR initStdLib (void\ *\fIstate\fP)
Register the Phasor standard library functions with the given state. Must
be called once after
.B createState()
before executing any script that relies on built-in functions.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fIstate\fP 10
A valid state pointer returned by
.BR createState() .
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
None.
.RE
.TP
.BR freeState (void\ *\fIstate\fP)
Destroy a state previously created with
.BR createState() .
Once freed, the state pointer must not be used again.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fIstate\fP 10
A valid state pointer.
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B bool
\-
.B true
on success,
.B false
if the pointer was
.B NULL
or appears invalid.
.RE
.TP
.BR resetState (void\ *\fIstate\fP,\ bool\ \fIresetFunctions\fP,\ bool\ \fIresetVariables\fP)
Reset the VM internals of an existing state. This clears the execution stack,
resets the program counter, and unloads any loaded bytecode. Optionally, it can
also remove registered functions and global variables.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fIstate\fP 25
A valid state pointer.
.IP \fIresetFunctions\fP 25
If
.BR true ,
all user-registered functions are unregistered.
.IP \fIresetVariables\fP 25
If
.BR true ,
all global variables are cleared.
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B bool
\-
.B true
on success,
.B false
if the state is invalid.
.RE
.TP
.BR isErrorStatus (void\ *\fIstate\fP)
Query whether the given state is currently in an error status.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fIstate\fP 10
A valid state pointer.
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B bool
\-
.B true
if the state is in an error status,
.B false
otherwise. Also returns
.B false
if
.I state
is
.B NULL
or appears invalid.
.RE
.SS Version
.TP
.BR getVersion (void)
Return the version string of the loaded Phasor Runtime library. The string
is a static buffer managed by the library and must not be freed by the caller.
.RS
.PP
.B Returns:
.B const\ char *
\-
The version string (e.g.,
.BR "3.3.0" ),
never
.BR NULL .
.RE
.SS Compilation
The compilation functions use a two-pass strategy to avoid dynamic memory
allocation inside the library: first call with
.B buffer
set to
.B NULL
to obtain the required bytecode size in
.BR *outSize ;
then allocate a buffer of that size and call again to fill it.
.TP
.BR compilePHS (\fIscript\fP,\ \fImoduleName\fP,\ \fImodulePath\fP,\ \fIbuffer\fP,\ \fIbufferSize\fP,\ \fIoutSize\fP)
Compile a Phasor source script to bytecode.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fIscript\fP 20
Null-terminated string containing the Phasor source code.
.IP \fImoduleName\fP 20
Module name used in error messages.
.IP \fImodulePath\fP 20
Filesystem path to the directory containing the script, used for
resolving import directives. Pass an empty string
.B ""
if not needed.
.IP \fIbuffer\fP 20
If
.BR NULL ,
the function only computes the required size and writes it to
.BR *outSize .
Otherwise, pointer to a pre-allocated buffer where the bytecode will be written.
.IP \fIbufferSize\fP 20
Size of the provided
.IR buffer .
Ignored if
.I buffer
is
.BR NULL .
.IP \fIoutSize\fP 20
Pointer to a
.B size_t
that will receive the size of the compiled bytecode. If
.I buffer
was
.BR NULL ,
this is the required buffer size; if
.I buffer
was non-NULL and large enough, this is the actual bytecode size written.
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B bool
\-
.B true
if compilation succeeded and, when
.I buffer
was provided, the buffer was large enough to hold the result.
.B false
indicates a compilation error, or that
.I bufferSize
was too small (in which case
.B *outSize
is still set to the required size). Compiler diagnostics may be printed
to
.BR stderr .
.RE
.TP
.BR compilePUL (\fIscript\fP,\ \fImoduleName\fP,\ \fIbuffer\fP,\ \fIbufferSize\fP,\ \fIoutSize\fP)
Compile a Pulsar (PUL) source script to bytecode. Behaves identically to
.B compilePHS()
except that
.I modulePath
is not needed.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
See
.BR compilePHS() .
The
.I modulePath
parameter is omitted.
.PP
.B Returns:
.B bool
\-
same semantics as
.BR compilePHS() .
.RE
.SS Execution
.TP
.BR exec (\fIstate\fP,\ \fIbytecode\fP,\ \fIbytecodeSize\fP,\ \fImoduleName\fP,\ \fIargc\fP,\ \fIargv\fP)
Load bytecode into the VM and execute it.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fIstate\fP 20
A valid state pointer, or
.B NULL
to use a temporary state.
.IP \fIbytecode\fP 20
Pointer to a buffer containing compiled Phasor bytecode.
.IP \fIbytecodeSize\fP 20
Size in bytes of the
.I bytecode
buffer.
.IP \fImoduleName\fP 20
Module name for error reporting.
.IP \fIargc\fP 20
Number of arguments passed to the script.
.IP \fIargv\fP 20
Array of
.IR argc
null-terminated argument strings. The first element (index 0) is conventionally the program name.
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B int
\-
The exit code returned by the script. A value of
.B -1
may indicate an unhandled VM exception. On success, the script determines the
return value.
.RE
.TP
.BR execFuncInt (\fIstate\fP,\ \fIbytecode\fP,\ \fIbytecodeSize\fP,\ \fImoduleName\fP,\ \fIargc\fP,\ \fIargv\fP,\ \fIfunctionName\fP)
Load bytecode and call a specific exported function, expecting an integer
result.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
As for
.BR exec() ,
with the addition of:
.RS
.IP \fIfunctionName\fP 20
Null-terminated name of the function to invoke.
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B int
\-
The integer returned by the function, or
.B -1
on error (including unhandled exceptions).
.RE
.TP
.BR execFuncString (\fIstate\fP,\ \fIbytecode\fP,\ \fIbytecodeSize\fP,\ \fImoduleName\fP,\ \fIargc\fP,\ \fIargv\fP,\ \fIfunctionName\fP)
Load bytecode and call a specific exported function, expecting a string
result.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
As for
.BR execFuncInt() .
.PP
.B Returns:
.B const\ char *
\-
The string returned by the function, or
.B NULL
on error. The returned pointer points to memory managed by the runtime; it is
invalidated on the next call to
.B execFuncString()
and when the library or state is freed. Copy the string to safe storage if
it must persist.
.RE
.TP
.BR evaluatePHS (\fIstate\fP,\ \fIscript\fP,\ \fImoduleName\fP,\ \fImodulePath\fP,\ \fIverbose\fP)
Compile and immediately execute a Phasor source string in one step.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fIstate\fP 20
State pointer, or
.B NULL
for a transient state.
.IP \fIscript\fP 20
Null-terminated Phasor source code.
.IP \fImoduleName\fP 20
Module name for error reporting.
.IP \fImodulePath\fP 20
Path to the script's parent directory for imports. Use
.B ""
if unused.
.IP \fIverbose\fP 20
If
.BR true ,
the abstract syntax tree is printed to standard output.
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B int
\-
Script exit code;
.B -1
on unhandled exception.
.RE
.TP
.BR evaluatePUL (\fIstate\fP,\ \fIscript\fP,\ \fImoduleName\fP)
Compile and immediately execute a Pulsar source string in one step.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
Similar to
.BR evaluatePHS()
without
.I modulePath
or
.IR verbose .
.PP
.B Returns:
.B int
\-
Script exit code;
.B -1
on unhandled exception.
.RE
.SH ERRORS
The C API does not use a uniform error enumeration. Instead, functions signal
failure via their return values:
.TP
.B Returns -1
.BR exec() ,
.BR execFuncInt() ,
.BR evaluatePHS() ,
and
.B evaluatePUL()
return \-1 when an unhandled VM exception occurs or the runtime encounters an
internal error. The VM may print diagnostic information to
.B stderr
before returning.
.TP
.B Returns false
.BR compilePHS() ,
.BR compilePUL() ,
.BR freeState() ,
and
.B resetState()
return
.B false
on failure.
.TP
.B Returns NULL
.B execFuncString()
returns
.B NULL
if the function call fails or the VM raises an exception.
.TP
.B Compilation diagnostics
When
.B compilePHS()
or
.B compilePUL()
fails, error details are typically written to
.BR stderr .
The library does not provide a mechanism to retrieve compile errors
programmatically in this version.
.TP
.B Error status query
.BR isErrorStatus ()
returns
.B false
when passed a
.B NULL
or invalid pointer; callers cannot distinguish this from a non-error state using
the return value alone. Always ensure the pointer was obtained from a successful
.BR createState ()
call before querying error status.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Compile and run a script (two-pass)
.nf
.RS
#include <phasorrt.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    void *state = createState();
    initStdLib(state);

    const char *src = "print(\"Hello, C API!\\\\n\");";
    size_t sz = 0;

    /* first pass: get size */
    compilePHS(src, "example", "", NULL, 0, &sz);
    unsigned char *bc = malloc(sz);
    if (!bc) return 1;

    /* second pass: compile */
    if (!compilePHS(src, "example", "", bc, sz, &sz)) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Compilation failed\\n");
        free(bc);
        freeState(state);
        return 1;
    }

    const char *argv[] = {"prog"};
    int ret = exec(state, bc, sz, "example", 1, argv);
    printf("Exit code: %d\\n", ret);

    free(bc);
    freeState(state);
    return 0;
}
.RE
.fi
.SS evaluation
.nf
.RS
#include <phasorrt.h>

int main(void) {
    /* no state needed, pass NULL */
    return evaluatePHS(NULL, "print(42 * 2);", "math", "", false);
}
.RE
.fi
.SS Calling an exported function
.nf
.RS
#include <phasorrt.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    void *state = createState();
    initStdLib(state);

    const char *src = "fn add_one(x) { return x + 1; }";
    size_t sz = 0;
    compilePHS(src, "add", "", NULL, 0, &sz);
    unsigned char *bc = malloc(sz);
    compilePHS(src, "add", "", bc, sz, &sz);

    const char *argv[] = {"add", "5"};
    int result = execFuncInt(state, bc, sz, "add", 2, argv, "add_one");
    printf("Result: %d\\n", result);   /* prints 6 */

    free(bc);
    freeState(state);
    return 0;
}
.RE
.fi
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
The state pointer (
.BR void\ * )
is opaque and must not be dereferenced or manipulated by the caller. It is
not safe to share a single state across multiple threads without external
synchronisation. For concurrent use, create one state per thread.
.IP \(bu 2
When
.B NULL
is passed as the
.I state
argument to execution or evaluation functions, a temporary state is created
internally and destroyed before the function returns. While convenient, this
incurs allocation overhead on every call.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR PHS (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
