.TH PHASORSTD_IO 3 "January 2026" "Phasor 2.1.0" "Phasor Standard Library 2.0.0"
.SH NAME
phasorstd_io \- Phasor standard I/O functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B include_stdio();
.PP
.B c_fmt(format, ...)
.B prints(string)
.B printf(format, ...)
.B puts(string)
.B putf(format, ...)
.B gets()
.B puts_error(string)
.B putf_error(format, ...)
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B include_stdio()
function registers a set of standard input/output functions for the Phasor runtime. These functions provide formatted output, string printing, and user input capabilities.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.BR c_fmt (format, ...)
Format a string using C-style format specifiers. Returns the formatted string without printing.
.RS
.PP
.B Format Specifiers:
.RS
.IP \fB%s\fR 8
String
.IP \fB%d\fR 8
Integer (decimal)
.IP \fB%f\fR 8
Float
.IP \fB%%\fR 8
Literal percent sign
.RE
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBformat\fR 12
Format string with specifiers
.IP \fB...\fR 12
Values to format (variadic)
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Formatted string
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR prints (string)
Print a string to stdout without adding a newline.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBstring\fR 12
String to print
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Empty string
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR printf (format, ...)
Print a formatted string to stdout without adding a newline. Equivalent to
.B c_fmt()
followed by
.BR prints() .
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBformat\fR 12
Format string with specifiers
.IP \fB...\fR 12
Values to format (variadic)
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Empty string
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR puts (string)
Print a string to stdout followed by a newline character.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBstring\fR 12
String to print
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Empty string
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR putf (format, ...)
Print a formatted string to stdout followed by a newline. Equivalent to
.B c_fmt()
followed by
.BR puts() .
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBformat\fR 12
Format string with specifiers
.IP \fB...\fR 12
Values to format (variadic)
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Empty string
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR gets ()
Read a line of input from stdin.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
None
.PP
.B Returns:
String containing the input line
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR puts_error (string)
Print a string to stderr followed by a newline character.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBstring\fR 12
String to print to stderr
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Empty string or error value
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR putf_error (format, ...)
Print a formatted string to stderr followed by a newline.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBformat\fR 12
Format string with specifiers
.IP \fB...\fR 12
Values to format (variadic)
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Empty string or error value
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.B Basic Output
.PP
.nf
.RS
include_stdio();

puts("Hello, World!");
prints("No newline");
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Formatted Output
.PP
.nf
.RS
var name = "Alice";
var age = 30;
var score = 95.5;

putf("Name: %s", name);
putf("Age: %d", age);
putf("Score: %f", score);
printf("Result: %s got %f%%", name, score);
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B User Input
.PP
.nf
.RS
puts("Enter your name:");
var name = gets();
putf("Hello, %s!", name);
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Error Output
.PP
.nf
.RS
if (error_condition) {
    puts_error("An error occurred!");
    putf_error("Error code: %d", error_code);
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B String Formatting
.PP
.nf
.RS
var message = c_fmt("User %s (ID: %d)", username, user_id);
puts(message);
.RE
.fi
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
All print functions flush output immediately
.IP \(bu 2
The
.B gets()
function reads until a newline character is encountered
.IP \(bu 2
Format strings are processed at runtime, not compile time
.IP \(bu 2
Unknown format specifiers are included literally in the output
.IP \(bu 2
The
.B c_fmt()
function is useful for building strings without immediate output
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR phasorstd_str (3),
.BR phasorstd_file (3),
.BR phasorstd_sys (3),
.BR phasorjit (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
