.TH PHASOR-PY 3 "March 2026" "phasor" "Phasor Programming Language"
.SH NAME
phasor \- Python module for reading, writing, and manipulating Phasor VM bytecode
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B from phasor import Bytecode, Value, OpCode
.B from phasor import Runtime
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B phasor
provides an in-memory representation of compiled Phasor VM programs
(\fI.phsb\fR files), together with serialisation, deserialisation,
and programmatic construction facilities.
.PP
A
.I .phsb
file consists of a 16-byte header (magic number, version, flags, and a
CRC-32 checksum) followed by four sections: constants, variables,
functions, and instructions.
Each instruction occupies exactly 21 bytes on disk: one
.B uint8
opcode and five
.B int32
operands.
.PP
The module exposes the following public names:
.RS 4
.TP
.B Bytecode
In-memory program representation.
.TP
.B BytecodeDeserializer
Low-level \fI.phsb\fR reader.
.TP
.B BytecodeSerializer
Low-level \fI.phsb\fR writer.
.TP
.B Instruction
A single VM instruction.
.TP
.B OpCode
Enumeration of all VM opcodes.
.TP
.B Value
A typed constant-pool entry.
.TP
.B ValueType
Enumeration of constant-pool value types.
.RE
.PP
The
.B phasor.Runtime
submodule provides cffi bindings for the PhasorRT shared library,
exposing VM state management, compilation, and execution functions
directly from Python.
.SH CLASSES
.SS Bytecode
.PP
An in-memory representation of a compiled Phasor program.
Implemented as a Python
.B dataclass
with the following attributes:
.TP
.B instructions
Ordered list of
.B Instruction
objects forming the program.
.TP
.B constants
Constant pool; entries are indexed by
.B PUSH_CONST
and
.BR LOAD_CONST_R .
.TP
.B variables
Mapping of variable name strings to integer slot indices.
.TP
.B function_entries
Mapping of function name strings to the index of the function's first instruction.
.TP
.B next_var_index
Next available variable slot counter; serialised as part of the variables section.
.PP
\fBClass methods:\fR
.TP
.BI "Bytecode.load(" path )
Read a
.I .phsb
file from disk and return a deserialised
.B Bytecode
instance.
.TP
.BI "Bytecode.from_bytes(" data )
Deserialise a
.B Bytecode
from a raw
.I .phsb
byte buffer.
.TP
.BI "Bytecode.from_native_binary(" path )
Extract and deserialise bytecode from the
.B .phsb
section of an ELF, PE, or MachO native binary.
Requires the
.B lief
package.
.PP
\fBInstance methods:\fR
.TP
.BI "emit(" op ", " op1 ", " op2 ", " op3 ", " op4 ", " op5 )
Append a new
.B Instruction
to the program and return its zero-based index.
Unused operands default to
.BR 0 .
.TP
.BI "add_constant(" value )
Append
.I value
to the constant pool and return its index.
.TP
.BI "find_or_add_constant(" value )
Return the index of an existing equal constant, or add a new one.
.TP
.BI "get_or_create_var(" name )
Return the slot index for the named variable, creating it if absent.
.TP
.BI "patch_operand1(" instr_index ", " value )
Overwrite
.B operand1
of the instruction at
.I instr_index
in-place.
Typically used to back-patch forward-jump offsets after the jump target is known.
.TP
.B disassemble()
Return a human-readable disassembly of the instruction stream.
Function entry points are printed as
.I <name>:
labels above their first instruction.
.TP
.BI "save(" path )
Serialise this object and write it to a
.I .phsb
file at
.IR path .
.TP
.B to_bytes()
Serialise this object and return the raw
.I .phsb
bytes.
.SS BytecodeDeserializer
Low-level parser for
.I .phsb
byte streams.
.TP
.BI "deserialize(" data )
Parse raw
.I .phsb
bytes into a
.B Bytecode
object.
Raises
.B ValueError
if the magic number, version, CRC-32, or any section tag is invalid.
.TP
.BI "load_from_file(" path )
Read a
.I .phsb
file from disk and deserialise it.
.SS BytecodeSerializer
Converts a
.B Bytecode
object into its binary
.I .phsb
representation.
.TP
.BI "serialize(" bytecode )
Return the complete
.I .phsb
binary as a
.B bytes
object.
.TP
.BI "save_to_file(" bytecode ", " path )
Serialise
.I bytecode
and write it to
.IR path .
Parent directories are created automatically if they do not exist.
.SS Instruction
A single Phasor VM instruction.
Holds an
.B OpCode
and up to five
.B int32
operands (unused operands default to
.BR 0 ).
.PP
\fBFactory class methods:\fR
.TP
.BI "Instruction.halt()"
Return a
.B HALT
instruction.
.TP
.BI "Instruction.push_const(" const_index )
Return a
.B PUSH_CONST
instruction that pushes
.I constants[const_index]
onto the stack.
.TP
.BI "Instruction.load_var(" var_index )
Return a
.B LOAD_VAR
instruction that pushes the variable at slot
.I var_index
onto the stack.
.TP
.BI "Instruction.store_var(" var_index )
Return a
.B STORE_VAR
instruction that pops the top-of-stack into slot
.IR var_index .
.TP
.BI "Instruction.jump(" offset )
Return an unconditional
.B JUMP
to instruction
.IR offset .
.TP
.BI "Instruction.jump_if_false(" offset )
Return a
.B JUMP_IF_FALSE
instruction that branches to
.I offset
and pops TOS when it is falsy.
.TP
.BI "Instruction.jump_if_true(" offset )
Return a
.B JUMP_IF_TRUE
instruction that branches to
.I offset
and pops TOS when it is truthy.
.TP
.BI "Instruction.call(" name_const_index ", " arg_count )
Return a
.B CALL
instruction.
.I name_const_index
is the constant-pool index of the function name string;
.I arg_count
is the number of arguments already pushed onto the stack (default
.BR 0 ).
.SS Value
A typed constant-pool entry.
Use the class-method constructors rather than setting
.B type
and
.B _data
directly.
.PP
\fBConstructors:\fR
.TP
.B Value.null()
Return a new Null-typed value.
.TP
.BI "Value.from_bool(" v )
Return a new Bool-typed value.
.TP
.BI "Value.from_int(" v )
Return a new Int-typed value.
.TP
.BI "Value.from_float(" v )
Return a new Float-typed value.
.TP
.BI "Value.from_string(" v )
Return a new String-typed value.
.PP
\fBAccessors:\fR (raise
.B TypeError
if the type does not match)
.TP
.B as_bool()
.TP
.B as_int()
.TP
.B as_float()
.TP
.B as_string()
.SS OpCode
.B IntEnum
of all Phasor VM opcodes.
Selected members are listed below; consult the package source for the full list.
.PP
\fBStack / control:\fR
.TS
l l.
PUSH_CONST (0)	Push constants[operand1] onto the stack
POP (1)	Discard top of stack
LOAD_VAR (42)	Push variable slot operand1 onto the stack
STORE_VAR (41)	Pop TOS into variable slot operand1
HALT (47)	Terminate execution
JUMP (37)	Unconditional jump to operand1
JUMP_IF_FALSE (38)	Branch to operand1 if TOS is falsy; pop TOS
JUMP_IF_TRUE (39)	Branch to operand1 if TOS is truthy; pop TOS
JUMP_BACK (40)	Backward unconditional jump
CALL (49)	Call function named by constants[operand1]
CALL_NATIVE (48)	Call a native (host) function
RETURN (53)	Return from the current function
IMPORT (46)	Import a module
.TE
.PP
\fBInteger arithmetic:\fR
.TS
l l.
IADD (2)	Integer add
ISUBTRACT (3)	Integer subtract
IMULTIPLY (4)	Integer multiply
IDIVIDE (5)	Integer divide
IMODULO (6)	Integer modulo
.TE
.PP
\fBFloat arithmetic:\fR
.TS
l l.
FLADD (7)	Float add
FLSUBTRACT (8)	Float subtract
FLMULTIPLY (9)	Float multiply
FLDIVIDE (10)	Float divide
FLMODULO (11)	Float modulo
.TE
.PP
\fBMath functions:\fR
.TS
l l.
SQRT (12)	Square root
POW (13)	Power
LOG (14)	Natural logarithm
EXP (15)	Exponential (e^x)
SIN (16)	Sine
COS (17)	Cosine
TAN (18)	Tangent
NEGATE (19)	Arithmetic negation
NOT (20)	Logical NOT
.TE
.PP
\fBComparison (integer / float):\fR
.TS
l l.
IEQUAL (25) / FLEQUAL (31)	Equal
INOT_EQUAL (26) / FLNOT_EQUAL (32)	Not equal
ILESS_THAN (27) / FLLESS_THAN (33)	Less than
IGREATER_THAN (28) / FLGREATER_THAN (34)	Greater than
ILESS_EQUAL (29) / FLLESS_EQUAL (35)	Less than or equal
IGREATER_EQUAL (30) / FLGREATER_EQUAL (36)	Greater than or equal
.TE
.PP
\fBLogical:\fR
.TS
l l.
IAND (21) / FLAND (23)	Logical AND
IOR (22) / FLOR (24)	Logical OR
.TE
.PP
\fBStrings / I/O:\fR
.TS
l l.
LEN (57)	String or collection length
CHAR_AT (58)	Character at index
SUBSTR (59)	Substring
PRINT (43)	Print to stdout (stack variant)
PRINTERROR (44)	Print to stderr (stack variant)
READLINE (45)	Read a line from stdin
SYSTEM (50)	Execute system command
SYSTEM_OUT (51)	Capture stdout of system command
SYSTEM_ERR (52)	Capture stderr of system command
.TE
.PP
\fBStruct / object:\fR
.TS
l l.
NEW_STRUCT (60)	Create a new struct instance
NEW_STRUCT_INSTANCE_STATIC (63)	Create a statically-typed struct instance
GET_FIELD (61)	Load a struct field (dynamic)
SET_FIELD (62)	Store a struct field (dynamic)
GET_FIELD_STATIC (64)	Load a struct field (static)
SET_FIELD_STATIC (65)	Store a struct field (static)
.TE
.PP
\fBMiscellaneous:\fR
.TS
l l.
TRUE_P (54)	Push boolean true
FALSE_P (55)	Push boolean false
NULL_VAL (56)	Push null
MOV (66)	Register move
.TE
.PP
Register-based variants of most opcodes exist with an \fB_R\fR
suffix (e.g.\& \fBIADD_R\fR, \fBFLADD_R\fR, \fBPUSH_R\fR, \fBPOP_R\fR).
.SS ValueType
.B IntEnum
encoding the type of a constant-pool
.B Value
entry.
.TS
l l.
Null (0)	No value
Bool (1)	Boolean
Int (2)	Integer
Float (3)	Floating-point
String (4)	String
.TE
.SH RUNTIME MODULE
.PP
.B phasor.Runtime
provides cffi bindings for the PhasorRT shared library
(\fIlibphasorrt.so\fR on Linux, \fIlibphasorrt.dylib\fR on macOS,
\fIphasorrt.dll\fR on Windows).
The library is loaded lazily on first use.
All functions raise
.B OSError
if the shared library cannot be located.
.PP
The module defines the opaque type alias
.B StateHandle
(a cffi
.I void\ *
pointer) used to identify a live VM instance across calls.
.SS "State management"
.TP
.B new_state()
Allocate a fresh Phasor VM state and return its opaque
.B StateHandle.
The handle preserves globals, registered functions, and execution
context across multiple calls.
Always pair with
.BR free_state() .
.RS
.TP
\fBRaises:\fR
.B RuntimeError
if
.I createState()
returns NULL;
.B OSError
if the library cannot be loaded.
.RE
.TP
.BI "init_stdlib(" state )
Register the standard library functions into
.IR state .
Call once after
.B new_state()
when built-in functions are required.
.RS
.TP
\fBRaises:\fR
.B RuntimeError
on failure.
.RE
.TP
.BI "free_state(" state )
Release a VM state.
The handle must not be used after this call.
.RS
.TP
\fBRaises:\fR
.B RuntimeError
on double-free or corrupt pointer.
.RE
.TP
.BI "reset_state(" state ", reset_functions=False, reset_variables=False)"
Clear the stack, program counter, and loaded bytecode of
.IR state .
When
.I reset_functions
is
.BR True ,
all registered functions are also removed.
When
.I reset_variables
is
.BR True ,
all global variables are cleared.
.RS
.TP
\fBRaises:\fR
.B RuntimeError
if the reset fails.
.RE
.SS "Compilation"
All compile functions return a
.B Bytecode
object that can be inspected, modified, passed to
.BR run() ,
or serialised with
.B Bytecode.save()
/
.BR Bytecode.to_bytes() .
They raise
.B RuntimeError
on compilation failure and
.B OSError
if the library cannot be loaded.
File-reading variants additionally raise
.B FileNotFoundError
when the source path does not exist.
.TP
.BI "compile_phs(" script ", module_name=" \(dqPython\(dq ", module_path=" None )
Compile a Phasor
.RI ( .phs )
source string.
.I module_path
sets the directory used to resolve compile-time imports; defaults to
the current working directory.
.TP
.BI "compile_phs_file(" path ", module_name=" None ", module_path=" None )
Read a
.I .phs
file and compile it.
.I module_name
defaults to the file stem;
.I module_path
defaults to the file's parent directory.
.TP
.BI "compile_pul(" script ", module_name=" \(dqPython\(dq )
Compile a Pulsar
.RI ( .pul )
source string.
.TP
.BI "compile_pul_file(" path ", module_name=" None )
Read a
.I .pul
file and compile it.
.I module_name
defaults to the file stem.
.SS "Execution"
.TP
.BI "run(" bytecode ", state=" None ", module_name=" \(dqPython\(dq ", args=" () )
Execute pre-compiled
.I .phsb
bytecode.
.I bytecode
may be a raw
.B bytes
/
.B bytearray
object or a
.B Bytecode
instance.
When
.I state
is
.BR None ,
PhasorRT creates and manages a transient state internally.
.I args
is forwarded to the script as
.IR argv .
Returns the script's integer exit code
.RB ( \-1
may indicate an unhandled VM exception).
.TP
.BI "run_file(" path ", state=" None ", module_name=" None ", args=" () )
Load a
.I .phsb
file and execute it.
.I module_name
defaults to the file stem.
Raises
.B FileNotFoundError
if
.I path
does not exist.
.TP
.BI "evaluate_phs(" script ", state=" None ", module_name=" \(dqPython\(dq ", module_path=" None ", verbose=" False )
Compile and execute a Phasor source string in a single call.
When
.I verbose
is
.BR True ,
the AST is printed to stdout.
Returns the script's exit code.
.TP
.BI "evaluate_phs_file(" path ", state=" None ", module_name=" None ", verbose=" False )
Read and evaluate a
.I .phs
source file.
The file's parent directory is used automatically for import resolution.
Returns the script's exit code.
Raises
.B FileNotFoundError
if
.I path
does not exist.
.TP
.BI "evaluate_pul(" script ", state=" None ", module_name=" \(dqPython\(dq )
Compile and execute a Pulsar source string.
Returns the script's exit code.
.TP
.BI "evaluate_pul_file(" path ", state=" None ", module_name=" None )
Read and evaluate a
.I .pul
source file.
Returns the script's exit code.
Raises
.B FileNotFoundError
if
.I path
does not exist.
.SH MODULE-LEVEL DATA
.TP
.B MAGIC
Magic number for
.I .phsb
files:
.BR 0x424D5850 \ (1112754256).
.TP
.B VERSION
Format version word:
.BR 0x03000000 \ (50331648).
.SH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.BI "extract_phsb_bytes(" path )
Extract the raw
.I .phsb
bytecode payload from an ELF, PE, or MachO native binary.
Locates the
.B .phsb
section using the
.B lief
library and returns the bytes beginning at the
.B MAGIC
marker.
.RS
.TP
\fBRaises:\fR
.B ImportError
if
.B lief
is not installed;
.B FileNotFoundError
if
.I path
does not exist;
.B RuntimeError
if the binary cannot be parsed, no
.B .phsb
section is found, the magic bytes are absent, or the payload size cannot be determined.
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
Load and print a disassembly:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
from phasor import Bytecode

bc = Bytecode.load("program.phsb")
print(bc.disassemble())
.fi
.RE
.PP
Round-trip through bytes:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
bc.save("copy.phsb")
bc2 = Bytecode.from_bytes(bc.to_bytes())
assert bc == bc2
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build a program programmatically:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
from phasor import Bytecode, Value, OpCode

bc = Bytecode()
ci = bc.add_constant(Value.from_int(42))
bc.emit(OpCode.PUSH_CONST, ci)
bc.emit(OpCode.HALT)
bc.save("hello.phsb")
.fi
.RE
.PP
Compile a simple conditional (pseudocode: \fBif x > 0: print("pos")\fR):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
from phasor import Bytecode, Value, OpCode

bc = Bytecode()

# constants
ci_0   = bc.add_constant(Value.from_int(0))
ci_pos = bc.add_constant(Value.from_string("pos"))

# load x (slot 0) and compare
x_slot = bc.get_or_create_var("x")
bc.emit(OpCode.LOAD_VAR, x_slot)
bc.emit(OpCode.PUSH_CONST, ci_0)
bc.emit(OpCode.IGREATER_THAN)

# conditional jump (target patched below)
jmp_idx = bc.emit(OpCode.JUMP_IF_FALSE, 0)

bc.emit(OpCode.PUSH_CONST, ci_pos)
bc.emit(OpCode.PRINT)

# back-patch the jump to point past PRINT
bc.patch_operand1(jmp_idx, len(bc.instructions))
bc.emit(OpCode.HALT)
bc.save("cond.phsb")
.fi
.RE
.PP
Extract bytecode from a compiled binary (requires \fBlief\fR):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
bc = Bytecode.from_native_binary("program")
print(bc.disassemble())
.fi
.RE
.PP
Compile and run a Phasor script, reusing the same VM state:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
from phasor import Runtime

vm = Runtime.new_state()
Runtime.init_stdlib(vm)

bc = Runtime.compile_phs('print("hello, world")', module_name="demo")
Runtime.run(bc, state=vm)

# Soft-reset between runs; globals and functions are preserved.
Runtime.reset_state(vm)
Runtime.run_file("next.phsb", state=vm)

Runtime.free_state(vm)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Evaluate a Phasor source file directly, without managing state explicitly:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
from phasor import Runtime

exit_code = Runtime.evaluate_phs_file("script.phs")
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.phsb
Phasor VM bytecode files consumed and produced by this module.
.TP
.I libphasorrt.so / libphasorrt.dylib / phasorrt.dll
PhasorRT shared library required by
.BR phasor.Runtime .
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B cffi
Required by
.BR phasor.Runtime .
Used to load and call the PhasorRT shared library at runtime.
.TP
.B lief
Optional.  Required only for
.B Bytecode.from_native_binary()
and
.BR extract_phsb_bytes() .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR python3 (1)
.BR PHSB (5)
.SH AUTHORS
See the
.B phasor
package metadata for information.

