.TH PHASORRT\-RS 3 "January 2026" "phasorrt" "Phasor Runtime Library 3.2.0"
.SH NAME
phasorrt\-rs \- Rust FFI wrapper for the Phasor Runtime
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B [dependencies]
.B phasorrt\-rs = "3.2.0"
.PP
.B use phasorrt_rs::{PhasorVM, PhasorError, get_version, compile_phs, compile_pul};
.PP
.B PhasorVM::new()
.B PhasorVM::init_stdlib(&mut self)
.B PhasorVM::reset(&mut self, reset_functions, reset_variables)
.B PhasorVM::exec(&mut self, bytecode, module, args)
.B PhasorVM::exec_func_int(&mut self, bytecode, module, function, args)
.B PhasorVM::exec_func_string(&mut self, bytecode, module, function, args)
.B PhasorVM::evaluate_phs(&mut self, script, module, path, verbose)
.B PhasorVM::evaluate_pul(&mut self, script, module)
.B get_version()
.B compile_phs(script, module, path)
.B compile_pul(script, module)
.fi
.SH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.BR PhasorVM::new ()
Load the Phasor runtime library and create a new VM instance. The library path
is taken from the
.B PHASOR_DLL_PATH
environment variable, defaulting to
.BR phasorrt.dll .
Panics if the native
.B createState()
returns a null pointer.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
None
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<PhasorVM, PhasorError>
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR PhasorVM::init_stdlib (&mut\ self)
Register the Phasor standard library with the VM. Should be called once after
.B PhasorVM::new()
before running any script that uses built-in functions.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
None
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<(), PhasorError>
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR PhasorVM::reset (&mut\ self,\ reset_functions,\ reset_variables)
Reset the VM state.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBreset_functions\fR 20
Clear all registered functions if true
.IP \fBreset_variables\fR 20
Clear all global variables if true
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<bool, PhasorError>
\(em true on success
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR PhasorVM::exec (&mut\ self,\ bytecode,\ module,\ args)
Execute pre-compiled bytecode in the VM.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBbytecode\fR 12
Compiled bytecode slice produced by
.B compile_phs()
or
.B compile_pul()
.IP \fBmodule\fR 12
Module name used in error messages
.IP \fBargs\fR 12
Argument slice passed to the script
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<i32, PhasorError>
\(em integer exit code from the script
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR PhasorVM::exec_func_int (&mut\ self,\ bytecode,\ module,\ function,\ args)
Load bytecode and call a named exported function, expecting an integer return value.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBbytecode\fR 12
Compiled bytecode slice
.IP \fBmodule\fR 12
Module name used in error messages
.IP \fBfunction\fR 12
Name of the exported function to call
.IP \fBargs\fR 12
Argument slice passed to the script
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<i32, PhasorError>
\(em integer value returned by the function
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR PhasorVM::exec_func_string (&mut\ self,\ bytecode,\ module,\ function,\ args)
Load bytecode and call a named exported function, expecting a string return value.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBbytecode\fR 12
Compiled bytecode slice
.IP \fBmodule\fR 12
Module name used in error messages
.IP \fBfunction\fR 12
Name of the exported function to call
.IP \fBargs\fR 12
Argument slice passed to the script
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<String, PhasorError>
\(em string value returned by the function
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR PhasorVM::evaluate_phs (&mut\ self,\ script,\ module,\ path,\ verbose)
Compile and immediately execute a PHS source string in a single step.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBscript\fR 10
PHS source text
.IP \fBmodule\fR 10
Module name used in error messages
.IP \fBpath\fR 10
Optional filesystem path for resolving imports; pass
.B None
or
.B Some("")
if unused
.IP \fBverbose\fR 10
Emit additional runtime diagnostics if true
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<i32, PhasorError>
\(em integer exit code from the script
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR PhasorVM::evaluate_pul (&mut\ self,\ script,\ module)
Compile and immediately execute a PUL source string in a single step.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBscript\fR 10
PUL source text
.IP \fBmodule\fR 10
Module name used in error messages
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<i32, PhasorError>
\(em integer exit code from the script
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR get_version ()
Load the runtime library independently and query its version string. The library
is unloaded when the function returns.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
None
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<String, PhasorError>
\(em version string, or
.B "unknown"
if the native call returns null
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR compile_phs (script,\ module,\ path)
Compile a PHS source string to bytecode without executing it. Uses a two-pass
strategy: the first call determines the required buffer size, the second fills it.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBscript\fR 10
PHS source text
.IP \fBmodule\fR 10
Module name embedded in the bytecode
.IP \fBpath\fR 10
Optional filesystem path for resolving imports
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<Vec<u8>, PhasorError>
\(em bytecode buffer suitable for passing to
.B PhasorVM::exec()
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR compile_pul (script,\ module)
Compile a PUL source string to bytecode without executing it. Uses the same
two-pass strategy as
.BR compile_phs() .
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBscript\fR 10
PUL source text
.IP \fBmodule\fR 10
Module name embedded in the bytecode
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
.B Result<Vec<u8>, PhasorError>
\(em bytecode buffer suitable for passing to
.B PhasorVM::exec()
.RE
.SH ERRORS
All functions return
.BR Result<T,\ PhasorError> .
.TP
.B PhasorError::StringError
An input string contained an interior null byte.
.TP
.B PhasorError::CompileError
The Phasor compiler rejected the source text.
.TP
.B PhasorError::ExecutionException(i32)
The runtime raised an exception; the inner value holds the error code.
.TP
.B PhasorError::NullReturn
A function expected to return a string pointer returned null.
.TP
.B PhasorError::Utf8Error
A string returned by the native library was not valid UTF-8.
.TP
.B PhasorError::LibraryError
The native library could not be loaded or a required symbol could not be resolved.
.SH EXAMPLES
.B Basic script execution
.PP
.nf
.RS
use phasorrt_rs::{PhasorVM, PhasorError, get_version};

fn main() -> Result<(), PhasorError> {
    println!("Version: {}", get_version()?);
    let mut vm = PhasorVM::new()?;
    vm.init_stdlib()?;
    vm.evaluate_phs("print(\"Hello, World!\\n\");", "main", None, false)?;
    Ok(())
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Compile then execute
.PP
.nf
.RS
use phasorrt_rs::{PhasorVM, PhasorError, compile_phs};

fn main() -> Result<(), PhasorError> {
    let bytecode = compile_phs("var x = 42; print(x);", "main", None)?;
    let mut vm = PhasorVM::new()?;
    vm.init_stdlib()?;
    vm.exec(&bytecode, "main", &[])?;
    Ok(())
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Calling an exported function
.PP
.nf
.RS
use phasorrt_rs::{PhasorVM, PhasorError, compile_phs};

fn main() -> Result<(), PhasorError> {
    let src = "fn greet() { return \"hello from phasor\"; }";
    let bytecode = compile_phs(src, "greet", None)?;
    let mut vm = PhasorVM::new()?;
    vm.init_stdlib()?;
    let result = vm.exec_func_string(&bytecode, "greet", "greet", &[])?;
    println!("{}", result);
    Ok(())
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Resetting VM state between runs
.PP
.nf
.RS
vm.evaluate_phs(script_a, "a", None, false)?;
vm.reset(false, true)?;
vm.evaluate_phs(script_b, "b", None, false)?;
.RE
.fi
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
.BR get_version() ,
.BR compile_phs() ,
and
.B compile_pul()
each load and unload the dynamic library on every call; prefer caching results
if calling them in a tight loop
.IP \(bu 2
The
.B PhasorVM
state is freed automatically via
.B Drop
by calling
.B freeState()
in the native library
.IP \(bu 2
.B PhasorVM
is not
.B Send
or
.BR Sync ;
use one instance per thread
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR phasorrt (3),
.BR PHS (5),
.BR PHSB (5)
.BR dlopen (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
