.TH PHASORSTD_FILE 3 "January 2026" "Phasor 3.3.0" "Phasor Standard Library 3.3.0"
.SH NAME
phasorstd_file \- Phasor file system functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B using("stdfile");
.PP
.B fabsolute(path)
.B fstem(path)
.B fname(path)
.B fext(path)
.B fparent(path)
.B fjoin(path1, path2)
.B fisdir(path)
.B fread(path)
.B fwrite(path, content)
.B fexists(path)
.B freadln(path, line_number)
.B fwriteln(path, line_number, content)
.B fappend(path, content)
.B frm(path)
.B frn(old_path, new_path)
.B fcd([path])
.B fcp(source, dest[, overwrite])
.B fmv(source, dest)
.B fpropset(path, property, value)
.B fpropget(path, property)
.B fmk(path)
.B fmkdir(path)
.B frmdir(path, recurse)
.B freaddir(path)
.B fsize(path)
.fi
.SH PATH UTILITIES
.TP
.BR fabsolute (path)
Get the absolute path of a file.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Absolute (weakly canonical) path string
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fstem (path)
Get the stem (filename without extension) of a path.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
String containing the stem component. For example, given \fB"archive.tar.gz"\fR, returns \fB"archive.tar"\fR.
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fname (path)
Get the filename component of a path, including its extension.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
String containing the filename. For example, given \fB"/home/user/docs/report.txt"\fR, returns \fB"report.txt"\fR.
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fext (path)
Get the file extension of a path.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
String containing the extension, including the leading dot. For example, given \fB"report.txt"\fR, returns \fB".txt"\fR. Returns an empty string if there is no extension.
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fparent (path)
Get the parent directory of a path.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file or directory
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
String containing the parent path. For example, given \fB"/home/user/docs/report.txt"\fR, returns \fB"/home/user/docs"\fR.
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fjoin (path1, path2)
Join two path components together.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath1\fR 12
The base path
.IP \fBpath2\fR 12
The path to append
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
String containing the joined path, using the platform's native path separator.
.RE
.SH FILE I/O FUNCTIONS
.TP
.BR fread (path)
Read the entire contents of a file.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
String containing file contents, or null if file cannot be opened
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fwrite (path, content)
Write content to a file, overwriting existing content.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.IP \fBcontent\fR 12
String to write
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true on success
.PP
.B Throws:
Runtime error if file cannot be opened
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fappend (path, content)
Append content to the end of a file.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.IP \fBcontent\fR 12
String to append
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true on success
.PP
.B Throws:
Runtime error if file cannot be opened
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR freadln (path, line_number)
Read a specific line from a file.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.IP \fBline_number\fR 12
Zero-based line index
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
String containing the line content
.PP
.B Throws:
Runtime error if file cannot be opened
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fwriteln (path, line_number, content)
Write content to a specific line in a file, expanding the file if necessary.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.IP \fBline_number\fR 12
Zero-based line index
.IP \fBcontent\fR 12
New line content
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true on success
.PP
.B Throws:
Runtime error if file cannot be opened
.RE
.SH FILE OPERATIONS
.TP
.BR fexists (path)
Check if a file or directory exists.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file or directory
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true if path exists, false otherwise
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fisdir (path)
Check if a path refers to a directory.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to check
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true if the path exists and is a directory, false otherwise
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fmk (path)
Create a new empty file.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file to create
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true on success
.PP
.B Throws:
Runtime error if file cannot be created
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR frm (path)
Remove (delete) a file.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file to delete
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true if file was deleted, false if file didn't exist
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR frn (old_path, new_path)
Rename a file.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBold_path\fR 12
Current file path
.IP \fBnew_path\fR 12
New file path
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true if renamed, false if source didn't exist
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fcp (source, dest[, overwrite])
Copy a file.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBsource\fR 12
Source file path
.IP \fBdest\fR 12
Destination file path
.IP \fBoverwrite\fR 12
Boolean to allow overwriting (optional, default false)
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true on success, false on failure
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fmv (source, dest)
Move a file (copy then delete source).
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBsource\fR 12
Source file path
.IP \fBdest\fR 12
Destination file path
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true on success, false if the copy step fails
.RE
.SH DIRECTORY OPERATIONS
.TP
.BR fcd ([path])
Get or set the current working directory.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
New working directory (optional)
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Current working directory path. If path argument provided, changes to that directory first
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fmkdir (path)
Create a new directory.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path of the directory to create
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true if created, false if directory already exists
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR frmdir (path, recurse)
Remove an empty directory.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Directory path
.IP \fBrecurse\fR 12
Boolean to remove subdirectories (optional, default false)
.RE
.RS
.PP
.B Returns:
Boolean true on success
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR freaddir (path)
List contents of a directory.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the directory to list
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
String with filenames separated by newlines, or error message on failure
.RE
.SH FILE METADATA
.TP
.BR fsize (path)
Get the size of a file in bytes.
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
Path to the file
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Integer file size in bytes
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fpropset (path, property, value)
Set a file property (timestamp).
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
File path
.IP \fBproperty\fR 12
Property character ('a'=access, 'm'=modify)
.IP \fBvalue\fR 12
Unix timestamp (epoch seconds)
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Result of property set operation
.PP
.B Throws:
Runtime error if epoch is negative
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BR fpropget (path, property)
Get a file property (timestamp).
.RS
.PP
.B Arguments:
.RS
.IP \fBpath\fR 12
File path
.IP \fBproperty\fR 12
Property character ('a'=access, 'm'=modify)
.RE
.PP
.B Returns:
Property value
.RE
.PP
Returns null on error
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.B Basic File I/O
.PP
.nf
.RS
using("stdfile");

// Write to file
fwrite("data.txt", "Hello, World!");

// Read from file
var content = fread("data.txt");
puts(content);

// Append to file
fappend("data.txt", "\nNew line");
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Line-Based Operations
.PP
.nf
.RS
// Read specific line
var line = freadln("config.txt", 0);

// Update specific line
fwriteln("config.txt", 2, "new_setting=value");
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Path Utilities
.PP
.nf
.RS
var p = "/home/user/docs/report.txt";

puts(fname(p));    // "report.txt"
puts(fstem(p));    // "report"
puts(fext(p));     // ".txt"
puts(fparent(p));  // "/home/user/docs"

var full = fjoin("/home/user", "docs/report.txt");
puts(fabsolute("../project"));

// Check before operating
if (fisdir("/home/user/docs")) {
    puts(freaddir("/home/user/docs"));
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B File Management
.PP
.nf
.RS
// Check existence
if (fexists("old.txt")) {
    // Rename file
    frn("old.txt", "new.txt");
}

// Copy with overwrite
fcp("source.txt", "backup.txt", true);

// Move file
fmv("temp.txt", "archive/temp.txt");

// Delete file
frm("unwanted.txt");
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Directory Operations
.PP
.nf
.RS
// Get current directory
var cwd = fcd();
puts(cwd);

// Change directory
fcd("/home/user/projects");

// Create directory
fmkdir("new_folder");

// List directory
var files = freaddir(".");
puts(files);

// Remove directory recursively
frmdir("old_folder", true);
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B File Size and Statistics
.PP
.nf
.RS
// Get file size
var bytes = fsize("document.txt");
putf("Size: %d bytes\n", bytes);

// Get full stat struct
var stat = fstat("document.txt");
if (stat != null) {
    putf("Size: %d bytes", stat.size);
    putf("Owner UID: %d", stat.uid);
    putf("Permissions: %d", stat.mode);
    putf("Hard links: %d", stat.nlink);
}
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B File Properties
.PP
.nf
.RS
// Get modification time
var mtime = fpropget("file.txt", 'm');
puts(mtime);

// Set access time
var now = time();
fpropset("file.txt", 'a', now);
.RE
.fi
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
File paths can be relative or absolute
.IP \(bu 2
Line numbers in
.B freadln()
and
.B fwriteln()
are zero-based
.IP \(bu 2
.B fwriteln()
expands the file with empty lines if necessary
.IP \(bu 2
.B fmv()
is implemented as copy + delete, not an atomic move
.IP \(bu 2
Directory removal only works on empty directories unless
.B recurse
is true
.IP \(bu 2
File statistics struct uses Unix-style permissions
.IP \(bu 2
Property characters: 'a' for access time, 'm' for modification time
.IP \(bu 2
.B fstem()
strips only the last extension; \fB"archive.tar.gz"\fR yields \fB"archive.tar"\fR
.IP \(bu 2
.B fext()
returns an empty string if the path has no extension
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Daniel McGuire
